Memory Isolation
=============

This document describes how memory is isolated in Tock, in terms of access
permissions of the kernel and processes.  Before reading this, make sure you
have a good understanding of the [design of Tock](Design.md) and the [Tock
memory layout](Memory_Layout.md).  <!-- npm i -g markdown-toc; markdown-toc -i
Memory_Layout.md -->

<!-- toc -->

- [Flash](#flash)
  * [Kernel code](#kernel-code)
  * [Process code](#process-code)
- [RAM](#ram)
  * [Kernel RAM](#kernel-ram)
  * [Process RAM](#process-ram)

<!-- tocstop -->


Memory isolation is a key property of Tock. Without it, processes could just
access any part of memory and the security of the entire system would be
compromised. Although Rust preserves memory-safety (e.g. no double frees or
buffer overflows) and type-safety at compile-time, this doesn't prevent
processes from accessing certain addresses which they should not have access to
in memory. Some other component is necessary to prevent this from happening, or
systems can not support untrusted processes.

Because of this, Tock assumes a memory protection unit (MPU). The MPU is a
hardware component which can configure access permissions for certain memory
regions. Three fundamental access types can be set for these memory regions:
read (R), write (W) and execute (X). Full access implies all three access types
are allowed in a certain memory region. 

Since processes are not allowed to access each others data, the MPU has to be
configured differently for each process. Therefore, with each context switch,
Tock reconfigures the MPU for that process. 

When the system is running in kernel mode, the MPU is disabled. This implies
the kernel has the ability to access all parts of code: in practice, the Rust
type system restricts what the kernel can do. For example, a capsule cannot
access a process's memory. Processes on the other hand are enforced by the MPU,
and therefore have specific access permissions to specific parts of memory.

We now proceed by going over memory isolation in flash and RAM, specifically
zooming into access permissions for processes.

## Flash
### Kernel code

The kernel code in flash is not accessible by any process. 

### Process code

Processes have read-only access to their own memory in flash. Generally,
processes can not write to their own flash. Using a capsule however, processes
can write to a part of their own flash: the binary section. 

Processes aren't allowed to write to the other part of their flash, their Tock
Binary Format (TBF) header. They also have no access to other processes'
memory.

## RAM

### Kernel RAM

Kernel RAM is not accessible by any process.

### Process RAM

Process RAM is memory space divided between all running apps. The figure below
shows the memory space of a process.

![Process' RAM](processram.png)

A process has full access to its own stack, data and heap and can use syscalls
to move these around at will. However, it has no access to its grant region:
this is only accessible by the kernel. 

Processes can communicate with each other through an [inter-process
communication (IPC) mechanism](doc/tutorials/05_ipc.md). This basically entails
a process setting up a part of its memory as a shared buffer, after which other
processes can read/write this buffer. Otherwise, a process is never able to
read/write other processes' RAM.
